# Food Truck Laws: Legitimate Safety Regulations or Crony Capitalism?
*Anson Fung*

Food trucks are the hot new trend, and the market is responding. “Roach
coaches”—trucks serving cheap gas station food at construction and office
worksites—no longer define the market segment.[^1] Rather, food trucks are now
recognized as “a respectable venue for aspiring chefs to launch careers”[^2] and
promise to provide “unique gourmet cuisine at lower prices than a sit-down
restaurant.”[^3]

[^1]: *What Is a Roach Coach? Where Did the Term Come from?*, M&R Trailers,
    https://www.mr-trailers.com/roach-coach/.

[^2]: Bryant Urstadt, *Intentionally Temporary*, N.Y. Mag., Sept. 11, 2009.

[^3]: Thi Le, IBISWorld, Report OD4322, Food Trucks 9 (2021).

As a result of increasing public demand for high-quality street food, an
increasing number of restaurateurs are turning to food trucks as a viable
alternative or supplement to brick-and-mortar restaurant business models. From
an operator’s perspective, the food truck business model presents certain
economic advantages over starting a comparable brick-and-mortar establishment:
lower operating costs mean food trucks can serve lower-priced gourmet food.
Mobility allows food trucks to target different areas based on changing consumer
demand—for example, in response to declines in downtown foot traffic during the
COVID-19 pandemic, food truck operators were able to refocus operations towards
“residential neighborhoods, essential businesses[,] and rest stops.”[^4] It thus
comes as no surprise that the food truck industry is projected to grow at over
twice the rate of the broader food service sector. By 2026, food trucks are
expected to generate \$1.3 billion in revenue.[^5]

[^4]: *Id*. at 12.

[^5]: *Id*. at 9.

Food trucks’ growing popularity hasn’t gone unnoticed by food service industry
stakeholders. Some existing restauranteurs argue that food trucks are unfairly
competitive and steal businesses away from brick-and-mortar restaurants. Glenn
Keefer, a Chicago restaurateur who owns Keefer’s and Keefer’s Kaffe,
characterizes food trucks as “unscrupulous [ ] operators” who “park[ ] in front
of the highest-priced real estate in the city to siphon off customers headed to
businesses paying property taxes, rent and fees for signs, loading zones, and
business permits.”[^6] Trattoria No. 10’s owner, Dan Rosenthal, argues that
“[e]very dollar I lose in sales to a food truck down the street costs me
50-cents in profit. It doesn’t take a lot of decline in sales for restaurants to
go out of business, particularly in this economy.”[^7]

[^6]: Julia Thiel, *Why Chicago’s Once-Promising Food Truck Scene Stalled Out*,
    Chi. Reader, Mar. 29, 2017.

[^7]: Michael Gebert, *Your Guide to the Latest Food Truck Kerfuffle (and
    Reality)*, N.Y. Mag., May 14, 2012.

And to some degree, the brick-and-mortar restauranteurs’ concerns are rational.
From the perspective of a fixed establishment, the limited number of proximate
storefronts inherently limits potential competitive volume. Further, similar
operational costs between proximate fixed establishments force operators to
focus on differentiating their restaurants on quality. Food trucks, absent
additional regulation, aren’t subject to such limitations—all they require are
open parking spaces. Food trucks, given their low startup costs, require fixed
establishments to also compete on cost. These two factors, according to
brick-and-mortar restaurateurs, mean food trucks are uniquely threatening to
fixed establishments. But proponents of food trucks disagree. They argue that
food trucks and fixed establishments aren’t directly competitive—a customer
won’t be deterred from patronizing a Ruth’s Chris because of a food truck:
Ruth’s offers “a comfortable and reliable place to eat with table-side
service”—factors obviously missing from even the best hypothetical steakhouse
food truck.[^8] And as matter of actual outcomes, analysis conducted by Mobile
Truck suggests that food trucks have yet to cause a single restaurant to shutter
its storefront.[^9]

[^8]: *Id*.

[^9]: *Id*.

Whether brick-and-mortar restauranteurs or food truck proponents are ultimately
correct on food trucks’ economic effects has yet to be conclusively determined.
But the effect of these debates has been to spur the creation of local
regulations addressing the concerns of brick-and-mortar restauranteurs, some of
which severely affect the viability of food truck ventures. Indeed, food trucks
are most prevalent in states with “nonrestrictive regulations for street
vendors” and easy access to mobile food permits.[^10] As of 2017, Los Angeles
had 2,600 food truck permits, and Austin, TX had 1,250. Chicago, by contrast,
had 70 operational food trucks. Data as recent as July 2021 indicates that no
more than 200 food trucks currently roam Chicago’s streets.[^11]

[^10]: Le, *supra* note 3, at 21.

[^11]: Ally Marotti, *How COVID Flattened Food Trucks’ Tires*, Crain’s Chi. Bus.,
    Jul. 9, 2021.

Two primary justifications underlie local food truck regulations. First are
economic justifications which attempt to reduce the operational cost advantages
of food trucks relative to fixed establishments. Second are health and safety
justifications premised on the belief that products from food trucks—as a
category—are more dangerous than those served from fixed establishments. This
paper focuses on the second justification by examining the results of food
safety inspections between food trucks and their fixed establishment
counterparts. Inspections from four localities are evaluated in this paper: (1)
Albuquerque, New Mexico; (2) Boston, Massachusetts; (3) Chicago, Illinois; and
(4) Louisville, Kentucky. These localities use identical inspection procedures
and criteria for both food trucks and fixed establishments, which allows us to
draw inferences between food truck and brick-and-mortar establishment types.

Section One of this paper summarizes food truck specific regulations that some
localities have attempted to justify as health and safety regulations. Section
Two provides an overview of existing literature examining food truck safety.
Section Three details this paper’s research design—the results of which are
discussed in Section Four. Section Five concludes with limitations and explores
opportunities for further analyses.

# Published Files
- Full Analysis PDF
- Scripts
- Output/Graphs
- [Map of Locations](https://www.google.com/maps/d/u/0/edit?mid=1jB7yBOIIz3ZVT9KmVkxuT3u5npSGRtTD&usp=sharing)
